[2024] 4 S.C.R. 518 : 2024 INSC 311
Wg Cdr A U Tayyaba (retd) & Ors. 
v. 
Union of India & Ors.
(Miscellaneous Application Diary No. 8208 of 2024)
15 April 2024
[Dr. Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI, J B Pardiwala and 
Manoj Misra, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to clarification of the order passed by this Court as 
regards grant of pensionary benefits to the women Short Service 
Commissioned Officers in Armed Forces.
Headnotes
Armed Forces – Women Short Service Commissioned 
Officers – Pensionary benefits – Order by this Court granting 
one time pensionary benefits to the women Short Service 
Commissioned Officers on basis that they have completed 
the minimum qualifying service of twenty years, required 
for pension – Eligible officers in terms thereof, not entitled 
to any arrears of salary, but the arrears of pension payable 
with effect from the date on which the officers are deemed to 
have completed twenty years of service – Pursuant thereto, 
women officers were released from service at the end of the 
fourteenth year and for computing the pension, salary was 
taken as the last drawn salary as of the date of the release, 
and no increments were granted to the applicants between the 
date of release and the date on which they are deemed to have 
completed twenty years service in terms of the aforesaid order 
– Applicants case that directions not correctly interpreted, 
once the applicants have been treated to have completed 
the minimum qualifying service required for pension, the last 
drawn salary must be taken as on that date and increments 
have to be computed for pension:
Held: Order by this Court granting one time pensionary benefits 
to the women Short Service Commissioned Officers clarified – 
Pensionary payments would have to be computed on the basis 
of the salary on the date of the deemed completion of twenty 
years – Women SSCOs entitled to notional increments between 
[2024] 4 S.C.R.  519
Wg Cdr A U Tayyaba (retd) & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
the date of release and the date on which they have completed 
the minimum qualifying period for pension, namely, the deemed 
completion of twenty years – On basis thereof, the one time 
pensionary payment due in terms of the previous order revised and 
arrears due and payable to be paid within the stipulated period – 
Issues as regards the computation of the commuted value of the 
pensionary payment, encashment of annual leave, and grant of 
ECHS benefits also clarified. [Paras 11]
List of Keywords
Pensionary benefits; Women Short Service Commissioned 
Officers; One time pensionary benefits; Minimum qualifying 
service required for pension; Arrears of salary; Arrears of 
pension; Last drawn salary; Date of the release; Increments; 
Notional increments; Computation of the commuted value of 
the pensionary payment; Encashment of annual leave; Grant 
of ECHS benefits.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Miscellaneous Application Diary 
No. 8208 of 2024
In 
Civil Appeal Nos. 79-82 of 2022
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.11.2022 of the Supreme 
Court of India in C.A. No. 79, 80, 81 and 82 of 2012
Appearances for Parties
Ms. Pooja Dhar, Ms. S. Ambica, Ms. Anshula Vijay Kumar Grover, 
Advs. for the Appellants.
R Bala, Sr. Adv., Santosh Kr, Akshay Amritanshu, Mohd. Akhil, Sachin 
Sharma, Alankar Gupta, Dr. Arun Kumar Yadav, Dr. N. Visakamurthy, 
Arvind Kumar Sharma, Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1 We have heard Ms Pooja Dhar, counsel appearing on behalf of the 
appellants and Mr R Balasubramanian, senior counsel appearing 
on behalf of the respondents.
520 [2024] 4 S.C.R.
Digital Supreme Court Reports
2 Delay in filing the Miscellaneous Application is condoned.
3 These proceedings arise from a judgment dated 16 November 2022 
in Wg Cdr A U Tayyaba (retd) & Ors v Union of India & Ors1. The 
specific directions which form the subject matter of these proceedings 
are set out below:
"i. All the women SSCOs governed by the present batch 
of cases shall be considered for the grant of one-
time pensionary benefits on the basis that they have 
completed the minimum qualifying service required 
for pension;
ii. The cases of the appellants shall be evaluated on the 
basis of the HRP dated 19 November 2010 bearing 
Part No 5; and
iii. The officers who are found eligible for the grant of 
pensionary benefits in terms of the present direction 
shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary, but the 
arrears of pension shall be payable with effect from 
the date on which the officers are deemed to have 
completed twenty years of service;”
4 In terms of the above directions, the Union government has issued 
Pension Payment Orders2 for the officers.
5 During the course of the hearing, it has emerged before the Court 
that the women officers were released from service at the end of 
the fourteenth year and the salary for the purpose of computing the 
pension was taken as the last drawn salary as of the date of the 
release. No increments have been granted to the applicants between 
the date of release and the date on which they are deemed to have 
completed twenty years service in terms of the judgment of this Court 
dated 16 November 2022.
6 According to the applicants, the authorities have not correctly 
interpreted the operative directions; once the applicants have been 
treated to have completed the minimum qualifying service required 
for pension, the last drawn salary must be taken as on that date and 
increments have to be computed for pension.
1 Civil Appeal Nos 79-82 of 2012
2 PPOs
[2024] 4 S.C.R.  521
Wg Cdr A U Tayyaba (retd) & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
7 The first direction which was issued by this Court was that all the 
women Short Service Commissioned Officers3 governed by the batch 
of cases would be considered for the grant of one time pensionary 
benefits “on the basis that they have completed the minimum qualifying 
service required for pension”. The minimum qualifying service for 
pension is twenty years. 
8 Hence:
(i) The pensionary payments would have to be computed on the 
basis of the salary on the date of the deemed completion of 
twenty years; and
(ii) The women SSCOs would be entitled to notional increments 
between the date of release and the date on which they have 
completed the minimum qualifying period for pension, namely, 
the deemed completion of twenty years.
9 The above directions clearly flow out of the first direction contained 
in paragraph 34 of the judgment dated 16 February 2022. This was 
subject to the further stipulation in direction (iii) that they will not be 
entitled to any arrears of salary, but the arrears of pension would 
be payable with effect from the date on which they are deemed to 
have completed twenty years of service.
10 Based on the clarification, the one time pensionary payment due in 
terms of the judgment dated 16 November 2022 shall be revised 
and arrears that remain due and payable shall be paid on or before 
15 June 2024.
11 Apart from the above direction, further clarifications of this Court are 
necessary on the following issues:
(i) The computation of the commuted value of the pensionary 
payment;
(ii) Encashment of annual leave; and
(iii) Grant of ECHS benefits.
12 As regards (i) above, the commuted value shall be computed as on 
the date of the deemed completion of twenty years. The commutation 
3 SSCOs
522 [2024] 4 S.C.R.
Digital Supreme Court Reports
factor shall, therefore, be that which was applicable on the date of 
the deemed completion of twenty years. The arrears that remain to 
be paid shall be paid over on or before 15 June 2024.
13 As regards the encashment of annual leave, in the event that any 
of the officers is found to have accumulated the maximum of 300 
days in respect of which encashment is allowable, the difference 
between the encashable quantum of 300 days and the amount which 
has already been released shall be computed and paid over on or 
before 15 June 2024.
14 The officers governed by this batch and other similarly placed officers 
would be entitled to ECHS benefits as retired officers.
15 Apart from the above directions, Mr R Balasubramanian clarifies that 
while the PPO indicated that it will be for “life”, this would not in any 
way debar the appellants from the benefit of any revised fixation of 
pension as and when it becomes due and payable. The PPOs, it 
has been submitted, shall also be corrected, since they erroneously 
referred to the applicants as having been ‘released’. This shall be 
corrected in terms of the judgment dated 16 November 2022 before 
15 June 2024.
16 The above directions resolve the grievances of the appellants-
applicants. Accordingly, the Miscellaneous Application shall stand 
disposed of.
17 Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain  Result of the case:  
Application disposed of.